[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: I've
found, throughout life,
I'm more inspired by a person
who has been through hell
and recovered themselves
than I am by a saint.
The courage and
fortitude that it
takes to recover
one's soul from prison
is another order of magnitude.
Kenny Johnson was
a repeat offender
serving a 40-year sentence
when he first came
into the presence of Gangaji.
Feeling truly seen and accepted
for perhaps the first time
in his life, his
reality took a u-turn
to a life of meditation and
contemplation and helping
others.
Kenny is with us today.
It's good to see you, Kenny.
I met you first a few years ago.
>>KENNY JOHNSON: Yeah,
2010, I think it was.
>>REGINA: Something like that.
You're a slimmer Kenny today
and a married Kenny today.
>>JOHNSON: A married
Kenny and slimmer Kenny.
Married life does that to you.
When I met my wife, Pilar,
I was chubby, she said.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but
you gave the best hugs.
>>JOHNSON: Yes.
Yes.
She still says,
when you hugged me,
you were like a bear hugging me.
She said, now, you're "flaco."
You're real thin.
I can hug you.
>>REGINA: It is true.
OK.
So Kenny, before we
begin this, we're
doing a three-part story here.
And we have Doug Noll, who has
the project, Prison of Peace,
who has talked about ways
in which we can listen
to each other very deeply
to resolve conflict, boom,
within seconds.
And it really does work.
And with your
story, I want to get
a whole different
perspective on it,
what it's like, how life
unfolds that you find yourself
in this situation.
We'll go into a lot
of different elements,
including the
psychology of what you
found inside with the
other prisoners as well.
And then, of course, up
through your Gangaji story.
But I want to start with
your life as a little kid.
>>JOHNSON: Right.
As a young man, I was raised
in Star City, Arkansas.
And as a young man, I would
say, Regina, from the age of 0
to the age around
7 to 8, my life
was like any other young child.
And then what happened was
as I was getting older--
>>REGINA: But let's
back it up a bit.
We talked about
something over lunch.
>>JOHNSON: Right.
>>REGINA: There
were seven of you.
>>JOHNSON: Mm-hmm, seven
of us in the family.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
what it was like as little kids
with-- it was kind of chaotic.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, very chaotic.
What happened was my
mother and my grandmother
and my aunt was the main
people that raised me.
>>REGINA: What happened to Dad?
>>JOHNSON: Dad never
was in the scene.
My mother got pregnant,
and my father at that time
disowned me.
He said, no, he's not my child.
Done.
And so that was, I
guess, my first wound,
because my father was not there.
And so when I came out,
there was just my mom,
and like I said, my
aunt and my grandmother.
And I was raised by them.
>>REGINA: But your mom
had her own challenges.
>>JOHNSON: She had
her own challenges
because, at that time,
it was me, Cynthia,
and then there was three of us.
We were living In Arkansas,
and she was picking cotton back
in the early '50s.
And so she and my aunt had
moved to migrate to Kansas City.
So my aunt says, come up north.
And so my mother went up north,
but I stayed in the south
with my grandma.
And that's when--
>>REGINA: How was that for you?
Because your dad wasn't there,
and when your mom went--
>>JOHNSON: I was happy because
it was just me and Grandma.
>>REGINA: Oh, well you
were the apple of her eye?
>>JOHNSON: I was the
apple of her eye.
>>REGINA: So those
are the glory days.
>>JOHNSON: That was great.
That's what I said.
At that time, they
were the glory days.
After that, Regina, it
was like in those movies,
a dark shadow came
over our house.
>>REGINA: What was
that dark shadow?
>>JOHNSON: And that was the
thief, the criminal nature
that just came.
And I started stealing
and taking and--
>>REGINA: Before
we go there, let's
go into the beginning bits,
because you were actually
a sensitive young man, a
good-natured man, a boy in love
with the two girls.
I love this story.
You've got to tell it,
because it all started
seemingly innocently enough.
>>JOHNSON: It was.
It was all innocent.
>>REGINA: Because you
were a little kid,
and you wanted to do
something nice for Peaches
and Pumpkin, these two girls.
>>JOHNSON: How
you remember that?
It's right, because that is
how the wanting to please
Peaches and Pumpkin,
it wasn't sinister.
It was just I was
wanting to have money
to buy candy for the girls.
That was it.
>>REGINA: Because
they liked sweets.
>>JOHNSON: They liked
sweets and I like sweets.
And so that's how I started.
And so, over the days
and weeks and months,
I had been taking quarters
and nickels and dimes
from my aunt's coin purse.
But then I get
there one morning,
and there's no nickels
and dimes there.
There's only greens.
So I took a green paper--
>>REGINA: Bill.
Whatever the bill was.
>>JOHNSON: Whatever it was.
And I'm going to buy some
candy again with the girls.
And I get to the store, and I
said, give them what they want,
and give me my usual.
>>REGINA: Big man, big man.
>>JOHNSON: Big man on campus.
>>REGINA: Give
Peaches and Pumpkin
whatever candy they want.
>>JOHNSON: Whatever they want.
It's on me.
All the candy is on me.
>>REGINA: OK, go ahead.
>>JOHNSON: Oh, god.
And so, what happened
was the store owner,
he says, here's the change.
And I saw all these
greens and change,
and I said, [GASPS] uh-oh.
>>REGINA: Because you didn't
know the value of paper money
yet.
I mean, coins were to you, as
a little kid, what had value.
>>JOHNSON: But paper money,
I didn't know the value.
And that's when I got
in trouble, because I
didn't know what to do.
And Peaches and
Pumpkin, they saw it,
and they-- and so,
they got the money
and took it and
gave it to Grandma.
>>REGINA: Oh.
>>JOHNSON: Because
I said-- [STUTTERS].
And they saw me.
>>REGINA: Why did Peaches
and Pumpkin do that?
>>JOHNSON: Because I was afraid.
I was terrified.
I got caught with the
hand in the cookie jar.
>>REGINA: All right.
So they took the money and
gave it back to Grandma.
>>JOHNSON: Then she says, here.
They got the money and
put it in their purse.
And they gave it to
Grandma that evening.
In about, I don't know, the time
escapes me, but Grandma put me
on a bus.
After that event, I was shipped
to Kansas City, Missouri.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Because you had done
something wrong in her home.
>>JOHNSON: I had
done something wrong.
And everybody was talking
about how Kenny was a thief.
>>REGINA: And how
old were you then?
>>JOHNSON: I don't know, 7
or 8, something like that.
Yeah.
And I was just moving
toward 9 or 10.
Because I remember when
I got to Kansas City,
I was still in
elementary school.
And I continued my ways, even
when I got to Kansas City.
And I moved in I learned
the lay of the land.
I discovered A&P Supermarket.
And A&P Supermarket had this
thing called a candy aisle.
>>REGINA: Yep, you obviously
had a weakness for sweets.
>>JOHNSON: And so I said,
wow, the stores up here
have a whole aisle of candy
and nobody's watching.
Oh, hoo, hoo, boy!
>>REGINA: But no, I mean, were
you OK with being sent back,
I assume to join your mom
again and your siblings?
You were OK with that?
>>JOHNSON: Not really, because I
knew I had done something wrong
and no one had consulted me.
And I'm being put on a bus.
So I knew, I mean, intuitively,
I knew something wasn't right.
But I'm going to be with Mom.
OK.
And I got there.
About the time I
get there, there's
another brother, Reggie.
He's on the scene now.
Then, later on, there
was Maurice, Robin,
and there's Shiloh.
So now there's four
of us in this family.
And we live in this one place,
and we all sleep on the couch.
And again, I realize I have
to make a decision here
on how to take care
of myself, because we
don't have-- we're poor.
Buying clothing for me and
having money in my pocket,
those things just
weren't happening.
So I saw, again, I have to go
out and make things happen.
So in order to supplement
my little belly--
>>REGINA: Your lifestyle.
>>JOHNSON: --my lifestyle--
I would go and steal a candy.
And what that did, Regina, over
the weeks and months and days,
that led me to other guys that
were doing the same thing.
I started seeking out guys
who were like-minded like me.
And that's when this
criminal nature slowly
started escalating.
And because my mother saw
who I was hanging out with.
She says, quit hanging
out with those hoodlums.
And I kept hanging
out with the hoodlums.
And I kept learning, getting
more and more sophisticated.
As I got older, I started
stealing cars, joy riding,
really, stuff like that.
>>REGINA: Now, let
me ask you, was
part of what you were
doing a sense of belonging?
>>JOHNSON: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: Because
now you actually
had a family that
you could relate to,
which was the guys
you were hanging with.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, it's very true.
Once I discovered the
"hoodlums," as my mother
called-- they became my family,
my brothers, my everything.
Because they totally saw me
in a-- like you said earlier,
the Gangaji was the first
person that really saw me.
Well, the criminals saw me too.
>>REGINA: But they were
a reflection of them.
They were just
holding up mirrors,
and you were seeing each other.
>>JOHNSON: We were
seeing each other.
And I say that because they
appreciated what I could do.
I had no fear.
I would do anything.
But at the same time as I'm
hanging out with these guys,
there was this violent nature
that was slowly gaining ground.
Anger, all this other
stuff was gaining ground.
>>REGINA: Was this partly due
to the fact that you were all
also maturing?
You were going through
puberty together?
>>JOHNSON: Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: And did most of the
guys in your gang or group
have similar backgrounds
where there was some violence?
>>JOHNSON: When you go to the
house, there was no dad there.
If you walk in the
house, hey, where's Dad?
He's not here.
Victor, Joseph,
Jimbo-- pick them.
And I would go in
the house, there's
Mom there and Sis, no Dad.
>>REGINA: And Mom's working.
>>JOHNSON: Mom's working.
>>REGINA: She's exhausted.
>>JOHNSON: Exhausted.
>>REGINA: In how
many cases were there
stepdads or boyfriends
that were maybe not
very helpful to the situation?
>>JOHNSON: It was just-- I'm
always amazed, even now, when
I see a mother and father
raising a child all the way up
until they're 30.
And they're off in collage.
Wow, man, how would that--
>>REGINA: How would that feel?
>>JOHNSON: How would that feel?
>>REGINA: Because
in your community
that you were hanging out
with, nobody knew that feeling.
>>JOHNSON: No one
knew that feeling.
And also, we were a bunch
of angry, young black guys,
and we were beating
each other up.
I remember the way of greeting
each other was, man, come here,
let's see how hard I can
hit you in the chest.
Can you take it?
And so we would see how
hard we could take a punch.
And so, pretty soon, we
started fighting and beating.
There's just the violence.
I remember about my coming up,
the violence and anger and rage
were a part of the fabric,
just something you accepted.
Then you to jail.
Then they taught
you how to fight.
So violence was always--
you can get to prison,
you've got to carry a knife.
Then when you're on the streets,
you've got to carry a gun.
It was always
anger, always rage,
always how to
protect yourself, how
to stay in control of
whatever you're doing,
whatever business you're
into, whether it's drugs,
robbery, burglary, thieving.
Whatever it is, the
violence was there.
And the violence for
me, Regina, never really
stopped over all the years.
It just kept-- it
was just there.
The anger, the rage,
was always there.
I'm getting ahead of myself now.
And I saw it when I
went back to prison
and I started working with
men and women in prison.
I just thought, wow.
>>REGINA: You're looking at
it from the other side now.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, now
I'm out of prison.
I've had my Wiccan experience.
>>REGINA: Yeah, we're going
to go back through all that,
still.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, and I went
back in, and saw this anger,
this rage is still here.
It never really left.
And then I get out,
and I get married,
and a whole bunch of other
stuff, and still, it was there.
And so, I guess my take on
prison rehabilitation, reform,
or anything, it has got to deal
with the rage and the anger
that's in all inmates-- male,
female, white, black, Latino,
Afghanistan, Jewish,
whatever the case may be.
If you have been placed
inside of a prison setting
for an amount of weeks
and days and months,
you have some unresolved
anger and rage there.
Just with a prison, it does it.
>>REGINA: No, prison
will do that alone,
aside from what
you bring into it.
>>JOHNSON: Going in, you've
got to start dealing.
You've got to start--
>>REGINA: Defending yourself.
>>JOHNSON: --defending yourself.
A lot of guys get
beat up, get raped.
This is regular.
It's a regular thing
to where you come out
with that same
rage into society.
>>REGINA: Yes, OK.
And now, I'm going to
write a note to you,
because I want to ask
you about what happens
as soon as one gets out.
But OK, so what landed
you in prison initially?
>>JOHNSON: Initially,
what landed me in jail
was joy riding, stealing
cars from the guys.
And then as I got
more-- I got out
of the juvie,
juvenile hall, then
I hooked up with some more guys.
Because I'm still
poor, still broke.
I still need money.
Now there are seven
of us in the family.
Everybody is grown now.
Mom is doing the best she
can as a single mother.
My stepfather, he's struggling.
And so, I said, well,
I see the situation.
I've got to keep
taking care of myself.
So I became a career criminal.
I just made my decision.
I'm going to be a criminal.
I'm going to make more
money than he's making,
so I'm going to be a criminal.
And that's when I started,
as you talked about earlier,
I started stuffing my
feelings, stuffing my emotions.
Because in order to do the
crimes that I was doing,
I couldn't have compassion.
I couldn't feel vulnerable.
I couldn't have any
concern for the other.
So there was no
feeling for the other.
And over the weeks
and months and years,
that became my persona.
I don't feel.
I know nothing.
Nothing can touch me.
And that doesn't bode well
when you've had an awakening.
You're out of prison.
Now you want to live your life.
>>REGINA: And you're so guarded.
You're so shut down.
>>JOHNSON: But you haven't
dealt with that shutdown, man.
It's still there.
>>REGINA: OK, so
you were in and out.
Finally you go in for 40 years.
Was that partly the result of
having been a repeat offender?
>>JOHNSON: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: And again,
when you come out,
it's not necessarily easy
to find work with a record.
So it's really hard to go
through the normal streams.
And again, you're broke.
You have a record.
And say you're determined
to break this cycle, what
are some of the options that
are available for a person
fresh out of prison?
Like some of the guys you
were friends with there
that tried to make a fresh go.
But is it nearly impossible?
Or, what are you limited to?
>>JOHNSON: We have
a lot of programs.
Most cities have programs.
There's programs--
>>REGINA: You go into
your halfway house.
>>JOHNSON: You go
to a halfway house.
You can go to welfare.
You can go to unemployment.
You can go to a lot of
places that say, well, we
don't have anything for you
here, but you can go over here.
And you can always
go to welfare,
and they'll give you something.
But then what about the jobs?
Then what about the
living situation?
There's layers of this stuff.
And so when a guy gets
out-- a man or woman
gets out of prison, if
they don't have any money,
and they're standing
downtown there
at San Rafael in California.
And they're off the bus.
They just got out
of San Quentin.
And there they are--
>>REGINA: Right in the middle
of Marin County, "Yuppieville"--
>>JOHNSON: And I have no money.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>JOHNSON: And there's a
liquor store over there,
and there are some guys
hanging around over there.
And what do I do?
And there's that little seedy
area on up the street there.
I say, well.
Hmm.
So the guy says,
well, I have no money.
What do I do?
His old nature kicks in.
I've got to hustle.
I've got to panhandle.
I've got to do something.
So he starts gravitating
to areas or somewhere
where he can--
man, what can I do?
And some way,
somehow, they always
find a place to stay or lay.
Then they get back
into their world.
It's very difficult--
I mean, even when
I was working inside
the prison, and the guys
would be in my program,
and I would get them out.
And the hardest people
to work with-- it's
still emotional for me-- is
for the ones who have been
child abusers, child molesters.
No one likes them.
No one wants to get
them up to start.
So when they get out
there, it's like, they
have to sleep on the ground.
Because no one really
likes-- and the system
has set it up to where
you can't go here.
You can't live here.
You don't have no program for
the child abuser or molester.
They have it really,
really, really, really hard.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
it's kind of over,
because your profile is there.
It's in your Neighborhood Watch.
>>JOHNSON: It's kind of over.
>>REGINA: Your
face is out there.
Your life's over.
>>JOHNSON: And it's like,
these guys, these men and women
are sick.
>>REGINA: That's right.
And this is the part I
want to talk to you about.
So in prison, there is so much
controversy over prison reform
these days.
And one of the real
bones of contention
is what you just said.
You have people who are
psychologically really unwell,
who end up doing
things that you would
expect for an unstable human
being that's emotionally
or psychologically hurting.
What, in your observation,
of the people around you
in prison-- and I'm not saying
it as a mathematical number,
per se.
But roughly, what
percentage of the people
you saw when you
looked around were
people who should have been
in psychological facilities,
or maybe drug rehab facilities?
Let's talk about
that for a minute.
>>JOHNSON: I started
doing prison work--
I think it was 2005,
2006-- in San Quentin.
I was excited.
I'm going back into-- I'm out.
I had my spiritual awakening.
I got funding to do a program.
It's This Sacred Space.
And the focus of
This Sacred Space
is to bring conscious awareness
to those incarcerated.
I'm going back to my own.
And I was like--
>>REGINA: Yeah, motivated.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, motivated.
And I get inside.
And I start working with
the men and talking.
And they're excited about me,
after having some victories.
But there were more
defeats than anything.
Because there was all
this anger and this rage.
And I saw they could let go
of their story for a moment--
I'm a bad person-- and
have a [INHALES / EXHALES].
I can breathe.
But then they'll go right back.
And I realized that there
needs to be more done here.
And my program can do this, but
what about this, this, this,
and this?
>>REGINA: Yeah, the
psychological help
that's needed.
>>JOHNSON: Then I start seeing
the hopelessness of everything,
like oh, this is kind of--
>>REGINA: That's hard, because
you went back in all enthused.
>>JOHNSON: Enthused, right.
>>REGINA: Well, at
one point now, you
didn't have the typical type of
problems we're talking about.
You had chosen this
as a career path.
>>JOHNSON: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And you had blocked off
the empathy in your life
for whatever else
was going on around.
This is how you were
going to make your living,
through these various endeavors.
So you end up there
for 40 years now.
And as I recall,
you started slipping
into a depression yourself.
>>JOHNSON: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: You were
an affable guy.
You stayed out of trouble.
We all see shows like
"Orange is the New Black,"
in the case of women, and
"Prison Break," and these
shows where Hollywood
gives their depiction.
And some of it is
pretty darn rough.
But the reality was you couldn't
really handle it much anymore.
And tell us what was
happening in your life.
Because I remember about
you saving your pills.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
why you had finally started
losing your spirits there.
>>JOHNSON: What happens is
that over the years, the months
of being a criminal, I kept
going back and kept going back
and kept getting worse.
I said, hm, I heard about this.
There comes a point
in a criminal's career
where they can end up getting
life and never get out.
And that happened to
me, because I kept
be a criminal I kept hustling.
And all of a sudden, I
was making a lot of money.
>>REGINA: What were your
primary areas you're
making money in at that time?
>>JOHNSON: Oh, cashing
checks at this time.
I was totally into
fraud, forgery.
And I was making thousands
of dollars a week.
And I finally got a call
after two or three years
of this checks kiting scheme.
And the federal
government arrested me,
took me to Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
And the judge gave me 40 years.
I was 32 years of age.
And he says, you're not going to
get out of prison until you're
at least in your '40s.
I said, wait a minute.
I'm 32.
I'm going to get out of
this over 10 years from now?
And I just said--
>>REGINA: That was a minimum.
Yeah.
>>JOHNSON: Guaranteed 10.
You're going to do 10.
I don't care what you do.
I don't care how you do it,
but you're going to do 10.
I said, wait a
minute, I'm 32, 42.
That's a decade--
>>REGINA: When you're a young
man, that's like forever.
>>JOHNSON: Then I realized that
this judge was a conscious man,
was an awake man, was
clear about this guy
here is a criminal.
He doesn't know what he's doing.
I've got to put him
away until he wakes up.
And that's what he did.
And that's what happened.
And I did the first 10
years, and the whole time
I was in prison
the first 10 years,
I was reading, reading,
reading, and reading.
>>REGINA: What were you reading?
>>JOHNSON: Everything
known to man.
I was reading Frantz
Fanon, Anne Wren.
I was reading "Playboy,"
"Penthouse," "Hustler,"
the "Bhagavad Gita"--
>>REGINA: Love it, "Playboy"
and "Bhagavad Gita,"
yeah, sure, why not?
>>JOHNSON: Everything.
>>REGINA: All parts of
the being and needs.
>>JOHNSON: I was
reading everything.
And it was only here
lately that I've
been reading something
called cognitive therapy.
And I read where it's a
kind of therapy that's
dealing with the thoughts.
And I didn't know I
was actually-- oh,
there was something
called bibliotherapy.
And I was actually reading
myself into waking up.
In the "Bhagavad Gita," it says,
if you repeat the name of God
over and over and
over and over, you
would have what we
call an epiphany,
an awakening experience.
You'll be free of
prisons, of the sin.
I said, I'm a sinner.
I want to be free of the sin,
because it was getting worse,
and I was ready
to commit suicide.
Now, I got 40 years
for writing bad checks.
They sent me to federal
prison in Chicago.
I got there in Chicago,
and I looked around, and I
was so depressed, Regina.
I said, I'm going
to commit suicide.
That's why I have a lot of
empathy for people who say,
I'm depressed.
I'm going to commit suicide.
I understand.
Life will put you in a corner
where you say, I want out.
>>REGINA: There are
no good options.
>>JOHNSON: No options.
I want out.
And so I said, OK, I want out.
Where's my option?
Exit door, how can I
take that door to death?
How can I get there?
Oh, take some pills.
I wasn't going to escape
from the 14th floor.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but you're
in prison, so how did
you get the pills?
How does all that work?
>>JOHNSON: The doctor.
You go to the doctor and
say, hey, I'm depressed,
and I want some sleep.
>>REGINA: OK.
All right, so you
got sleeping pills.
>>JOHNSON: And I
start sticking them--
>>REGINA: You put them
away, put them away.
>>JOHNSON: And this
prison guard saw me.
>>REGINA: He was watching
you saving the pills.
>>JOHNSON: He came to my cell,
and he said, little hustler,
that light that you're trying
to put out will not die.
I said, what are you
talking about, man?
>>REGINA: A prison guard
said, the light you're
trying to put out will not die?
That was an enlightened guard.
>>JOHNSON: That was a
very enlightened guard.
He was a Christian
guard, and he was
speaking from the
perspective of Christians,
"This little light of mine,
I'm gonna let it shine."
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>JOHNSON: And so,
I said, I don't
know what you're talking about.
He said, I want you
to do me one favor.
See those guys over there?
Go talk to those guys.
Those guys are
very positive guys.
These are guys in the day room.
He was in my room.
Look, those guys out
there are very positive.
Go talk to those guys.
>>REGINA: Are they kind
of like Rastafarian guys?
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: I remember that, yeah.
>>JOHNSON: And I went
to the guy who had
the dreadlocks, and everything.
And I went to these guys, and
they were very positive, very
encouraging, very supportive.
And they said, we're
going to help you.
And they prepared me to
fight my case legally.
And so once I realized I
had an option, I had hope.
Then I gave the pills away.
I was no longer depressed.
I was excited because why?
I had hope.
>>REGINA: Hope, yeah.
>>JOHNSON: I find if you
have hope, there's a chance.
And even people with
life, or whatever,
they still have
some kind of hope.
It's a little bit.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but we don't
need a lot to continue with.
Hope's an amazing thing.
>>JOHNSON: You don't need much.
Even the suicide was hope.
I had an option.
I was back in control.
That's my control.
I'm in control now.
OK, the judge
didn't have my life.
I have control of my life.
I'm going to take it.
But the brothers gave
me another option.
And so, my teaching
on my message today,
at the age of 67, after spending
so many years in prison,
after working in prison, and
being married, and having
written a book, my
message is this.
The more we can get
healthy, self-help material
into the male or female
so they can read that,
that's one thing.
But then once they are
ready to come out here,
then they need something else.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, so these guys--
>>JOHNSON: They can read this
stuff-- the preparedness,
the reading and studying.
That starts the process.
>>REGINA: But these are almost
cellular memories by this time.
These are programs.
These are just programs.
So with these guys,
what kind of things
were they sharing with you?
What were they having you read?
And then when you did
Gangaji come into it?
>>JOHNSON: Gangaji
came into my life
after the suicidal
episode passed.
And what happened was,
from then on, I had hope.
So for five years, I was
fighting my case all the way
to the Supreme Court.
By the time they denied
me, I'm halfway done.
I'm cool now.
I'm playing tennis.
I'm lifting weights.
I'm running.
I cool now.
I'm gellin'.
I got me a little hustle going.
I'm making money.
I'm cool now.
I'm back to--
>>REGINA: Control of your life--
>>JOHNSON: Control of my life.
>>REGINA: --within prison.
>>JOHNSON: Within prison.
And then I got out of prison.
I went in in 1982.
I got out in 1992.
When I got out in
1992, my brother Robin,
the youngest of the
family, had just
died a month earlier from AIDS.
And that just like--
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>JOHNSON: So now
there's six of us,
and my mother has not recovered
from the youngest passing
away, so her baby.
And so I come out.
The youngest brother
has passed away.
My mother is distraught.
And I had to go to
Iowa to do my program.
I go back there
with my girlfriend.
I get to Iowa.
And I'm there for about
16 months, and I violate.
I'm back in the prison.
I go back to federal prison.
And I'm in federal
prison in Colorado.
I lived in Colorado.
And that's when Gangaji came.
Because Gangaji had a
nonprofit organization
right here in Boulder, called
the Gangaji Foundation.
And they were coming in to
prisons sharing their message.
And also, at the same time, the
Trungpa Rinpoche-- Shambhala
was coming in.
Their organization
with the Buddhists
was coming in,
sharing their message.
So we had Gangaji, who
was at [INAUDIBLE].
And the Buddhist guys, they
were sharing their teachings
with us.
So we were having a lot of
spiritual material fed to us.
And it was in 1995 when Gangaji
came to the prison-- 1994,
I'm sorry-- when she
came to the prison
where I had my awakening
in September 1994.
And what I mean by awakening
is that guy, that mindset,
those thoughts that
were keeping me robbing,
stealing, pimping, doing these
very violent things, when
I had my connection
with Gangaji,
I looked into her
eyes, and I saw myself.
And I felt this love.
And I felt this acceptance.
That criminal nature
was turned upside down.
It was gone, but in its
place was this emptiness.
This guy is like,
what do I do now?
>>REGINA: No, let's talk about
that moment with her for a bit.
Because, obviously,
throughout all of this,
you had done a good job of
hiding from yourself, OK.
So first of all,
no less hiding what
you were doing as much
as you could or needed to
from other people.
But was there a sense
with her that you
couldn't hide anything?
>>JOHNSON: Mm, even today, if
she was to walk into the room,
I would say--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>JOHNSON: Because she sees me.
She actually sees me,
sees me through the core.
She can look in my eyes
and see that I'm afraid.
She could see me.
And I had never seen
anyone to see me.
Like, oh my god, this
is-- my whole body,
you just want to bow.
>>REGINA: Because she's still
loving you and accepting
you, no matter what.
>>JOHNSON: She's not
seeing me as [INAUDIBLE].
It's like, wow,
Kenny, I see you.
You're suffering.
Wow, you're beautiful.
Wow, how have you been doing?
It's always positive.
It's always encouraging.
It's always embracing.
>>REGINA: And what were
the feelings the first time
you had that connection
with her in the eyes?
>>JOHNSON: When I first
looked into her eyes,
I said, what's going on here?
I'm sitting here, and
she's talking to people.
I'm saying, damn, what's-- and
I walked out of the prison.
When I walked out of the chapel,
after this meeting with her,
and I met one of the volunteers,
I looked into her eyes, I said,
[GASPS], I recognized something
in another human being.
I saw something in Gangaji.
Then I saw the same thing in
this other-- in the volunteer.
I said, are you
like this always?
There we started having
a different conversation.
And she said, yes.
I said, wow.
And what I meant was, are
you in this love always?
Are you happy always?
Are you in this peace always?
She says, yes.
I said, wow, this is cool.
>>REGINA: I bet it was
from where you're sitting.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah.
And that was the beginning of
the base gross criminal nature
being taken from me.
But the refined aspects
hadn't been dealt with.
>>REGINA: I understand
that, but the point
was you recognized each other.
It wasn't a one-way deal.
When she saw you, you
could see that in her.
>>JOHNSON: Oh, yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: Which
speaks to the point
that in most human
beings, regardless
what we've chosen
to do with our time,
that essence inside is
always still available to be
either recognized or lit up.
And in your case,
you were lucky enough
to have a mirror reflect
that back in yourself to you,
the goodness in you,
and the parts that
are kind and gregarious and
loving, which you hadn't seen
in a long time in yourself.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, I can see it
now in you, the same, the same.
No difference in
Gangaji, no difference
in the cameraman there, no
difference in my wife, no one.
It's the same.
>>REGINA: That's the
essence of the human being.
OK, now I'm going to ask you
a little off-topic question
on that.
When you were in prison,
were there people
that you felt had cut
off so severely from that
that they would never recover it
and would always really remain
a danger to society,
because they just
couldn't recover themselves?
>>JOHNSON: Yeah.
Some guys just-- that was the
hardest part, seeing some guys
just are gone.
They aren't coming back.
They just aren't coming back.
And I don't even know
if there's anything
that can be done for them.
I believe that
everyone can be healed.
But would it happen
in this lifetime?
I don't know.
>>REGINA: Right.
Yeah.
But most people that you were
around could come back, right?
>>JOHNSON: They could come back
if they wanted to come back.
See, I wanted to come back.
Even now, my friends say,
Kenny, what I love about you,
you want to do the work.
You're excited about
doing the work.
And what I mean is
that the healing
will keep working on myself,
working on the fears,
working on the insecurities,
working on the doubts,
working on not having enough
money to pay the bills.
Keep working on those things,
because we're eternal beings.
We don't stop.
When we lay the body down,
our awareness keeps going.
Now I don't know where it goes.
That's my next journey.
But I have enough spiritual
insights and wisdom
that once I lay this body down,
this awareness, this knowledge,
goes with me.
The body, boom,
back to the grave.
But this awareness
is still here.
>>REGINA: So because you
know that, you're motivated.
So let's talk about
after Gangaji,
after this being seen, and
being able to see others,
then how did you end up
getting back out of prison?
How did you carry
this work forward?
And let's talk about
This Sacred Space
and what you've done
through the years.
>>JOHNSON: After I got out of
prison, I moved to Kansas City
for a year.
I stayed with my mother.
>>REGINA: How long did you have
to stay in prison that time?
>>JOHNSON: This last time I
stayed-- I went in in 1994,
and I got out in 1997,
so about three years.
>>REGINA: Relatively
short sentence.
Yeah.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, two
and a half years.
I got out in 1997, and then
I stayed with my mother
for a year.
And I bonded with my grandkids,
my daughter, and everybody.
Then my parole officer loved me.
And I said, man, I went
to Colorado for a month.
For Thanksgiving of
1997, I went to Colorado,
and I met so many
Gangaji people.
I said, I'm coming back here.
So I went to my parole
officer and said,
I want to move to
Boulder, Colorado.
He said, if you
give me an address
and pay the state, no problem.
So I had plenty of people say,
you can stay here in my house.
So I thought, I'm
going to pay the state.
I gave him the address.
I packed my car up.
I drove out here, to the
chagrin of my daughter.
She wanted me to stay there.
My mother was happy.
Because why?
I wasn't a criminal anymore.
I was following this
spiritual teacher.
Whoever she is, I
don't care, as long
as he's not robbing anymore.
Because my mother was grateful.
She was thrilled.
And I got to Colorado.
I stayed here for a year.
And then I was invited to go
to San Francisco-- no, LA.
I went to LA, and I
met the people there.
Then I went to San Francisco.
And it says, come back.
And I went back to California
almost six or seven months
later.
I got to California,
and I got here,
and I was doing limousine
work, driving limousines.
I was happy driving a limousine.
Then one day, I
say, you know what?
I'm not driving a
limousine anymore.
Those five years, from 1999
to-- five years-- 2003,
something like that,
I drove a limousine.
And then in 2005, I
met this gentleman
who's a Gangaji supporter.
And he says, hey, let's
start a prison program.
I'll fund it.
You can do the work.
Well, I've never heard
nothing like that.
So I said, OK, sure.
How do we look?
And so he says, well, get
this, get this, get this.
I don't know a thing
about bookkeeping.
about accounting.
I don't know anything.
But someway, somehow,
all of these people
came together to help me get
my nonprofit, the website,
and the mission, and the
vision, and the funding.
It all came together.
And I started going
into certain prisons.
And that's when I was extremely
excited, because now, I said,
I can give back.
It feels good giving back.
But over the weeks and months
and years of giving back,
Regina, working with
the men, the women,
I started seeing something
that was disheartening.
I realized I couldn't fix
them all, that what I had
was not enough.
>>REGINA: And you were basically
teaching them meditation skills
and practices.
>>JOHNSON: Meditation, read,
read, read, pray, pray, pray,
yoga, yoga, yoga.
Let go of your thoughts.
As Gangaji said, get
ready for your heart
to be broken over and
over and over again.
Because so many of the men and
women just weren't ready to
wake up.
They said they were,
but the reality
of letting go of their
past life, or letting go--
I'll give you an example.
It's a young man.
He was mentally ill.
He was in my program.
He was homeless,
about 20 years old.
He said, Kenny, I
need to work with you.
I want to work with you.
He was in my program, a group.
So we start working
individually, like this here.
And so he got to the
point, I said, how would it
feel if you had to
have a job, make money,
and that you'll pay the state?
He hit anger.
He got so angry.
He says, I'm done.
I said, whoa, whoa,
no, let's keep working.
I'm done.
I said, no.
I said, what happened?
I can't see myself
not being homeless.
>>REGINA: These
are the programs,
the programs inside the
head, the entire being.
>>JOHNSON: Oh, my god.
And then he fell into
one of those categories,
psychological, or whatever.
Therapists would say
he's this, he's that.
I said, oh my god.
And I said, please stop.
And that is when I realized
that, uh-oh, I don't think--
>>REGINA: Meditation
only goes so far.
>>JOHNSON: So far, if
they're going to go so far,
the person has got to want this.
>>REGINA: But you
know what, Kenny?
It's not just in prison.
It's throughout
all of humankind,
where we think we can learn
a technique or two, right?
And we can be dedicated
to it, like you
have been dedicated to it.
And you were able, but you
had to go through a lot
to find your way out.
And in the end, you have these
psychological subconscious--
subconscious is where it's at.
All these programs live
in the subconscious,
below our level of awareness.
>>JOHNSON: That's right.
That's right.
>>REGINA: And so
how did you learn--
how did that
knowledge define you
when you started seeing
this is a program that's
not going to be broken.
Here's someone, I think, that
we can begin working with.
What is the X
factor in the person
that has the same
kind of programs
that finds their way out?
>>JOHNSON: Well, I'll
give you an example.
One of my students right
now, today, his name
is "Chatterbox"-- Anthony.
And when he got the
message, he says,
man, I see what you're
talking about, Kenny.
Wow.
His eyes lit up.
He got out of prison.
He got married.
And today, now, we
talk all the time.
And he was just-- one
victory is all I need.
And he just gave me all
the-- he kept me going.
I have encouragement, because
I saw how he took the message,
had the awakening experience.
And I realized that
it's not in the numbers.
If I've got 50 guys
in the program,
I want 50 guys to
have the awakening.
I realized that if this one
guy can change his life,
that he's going to change so
many other people's lives.
He's married.
He's working with people.
His son is with him.
His son-in-law is with him.
In another words, he is just
normally living his life.
He's still got his issues.
I would suggest therapy,
but he doesn't need to.
He's fine.
But he's out and he's
not returning to prison.
He's not a recidivist.
He's not encouraging other
people to recidivate.
And so, I was excited.
I'm happy, grateful.
But still, Regina, I
didn't know till just here
lately that oh, man,
there's still another piece
that most people
need and they're not
getting from the system.
The system was
giving it to them,
but it's giving it-- I
was reading the other day.
This says they did some studies.
Cognitive therapy, well,
with I guess, drug therapy.
They had so many.
And the ones who were
doing the cognitive therapy
were just reading about their
depression, their negativity,
and how they can change
it, and doing little tests.
And the ones who were doing
drugs, they was given drugs.
And they were
saying that the ones
that's reading on their
own improved immensely.
>>REGINA: Because
they were motivated.
>>JOHNSON: They were motivated.
And they were taking
the material in.
Like you said, it's going
into the subconscious,
and it's healing
those places, right?
But the ones who were
doing drugs, well, drugs,
so on and so forth.
And so, because there was no
therapy to go along with it.
So they're saying,
those who are depressed
and doing the bibliotherapy,
if we can get you
some therapy to
go along with it,
these people have
got a great chance.
>>REGINA: So what
happens, say-- OK,
so a man or woman
gets out of prison.
One of the first
things they want to do
is hook up with someone
and have a relationship.
Because they've been
isolated, alone,
lonely, without touch for a
long time, in a lot of cases.
Yet, these parts
haven't been healed.
>>JOHNSON: That's right.
>>REGINA: So now you go
out, and what kind of person
are you going to
usually hook up with?
>>JOHNSON: Well, most likely,
the guys that are getting out,
or the woman getting
out, either she's
a victim or a perpetrator.
So victim/perpetrator
relationships develop.
>>REGINA: Will continue.
>>JOHNSON: Continue.
And then you wonder why,
we've been together a year
or six months,
and then we argue.
We fight.
My wife, we went
through the same thing.
And then, finally, we realized
that if we keep doing this,
we're not going to
be in a relationship.
I love you.
You love me, but something
is going on here.
>>REGINA: Same old
programs playing.
>>JOHNSON: Same old programs.
And what I found out is that--
I went to my therapist friend.
She says, Kenny, maybe you
should see a therapist.
I said, no problem, because I
want the relationship to last.
And as I'm working with
the therapist, he's saying,
well, she has this,
and you have this.
I said, oh my god, what about
all the men and the women that
are coming out of prison that
will not get this knowledge,
won't get help.
>>REGINA: Because there's
nothing in the system set up
to really help.
>>JOHNSON: No.
I mean, it's there.
>>REGINA: What's the halfway
house experience like?
>>JOHNSON: OK, halfway
houses-- I'll give an example.
I know a guy.
He has good credit.
He's been in the
rehabilitation field out here.
And all of a sudden, he says,
I'm going to open up me,
buy five houses.
So he goes to the bank.
I want to buy this house,
this house, this house.
And I want to run it for--
so the bank says, yes.
This is a good
moneymaking opportunity.
You've got 10 guys in
one house, and they're
paying $1,000 a month.
Wow.
So the bank is happy
to support him.
But all these guys
are coming out
to this guy's house, which
is just a place to stay,
go get a job.
>>REGINA: It's not like you're
getting psychological therapy
and help, per se.
>>JOHNSON: Those
things are there,
but that's not the focus.
The focus is getting a job
and paying the mortgage,
so you can pay the bank.
That's the focus.
That's the real focus now.
I mean, it's like,
OK, you're here, man.
But you've got to make that
check, man, because I've
got to pay the mortgage.
So they have things in place.
When guys get out, they have
a house that's a pit stay.
>>REGINA: But then you're
back to the same old problem.
You can't get a job because
you've got a record.
>>JOHNSON: You've got a record.
Then you get angry, and you
start doing drugs, get alcohol.
Pretty soon, you're back in.
>>REGINA: Back in, yeah.
>>JOHNSON: For those who get the
job, get the car, get two girl,
get the house, and get
the baby, then there
is something sinister
that's still going on.
The wife is wondering why
every six months, we have
these blowups and these fights.
We're still having--
>>REGINA: Violence, and stuff.
>>JOHNSON: Right, the rage
in him has not yet-- I mean,
he's still drinking on the side.
Or he's still
smoking cigarettes,
or whatever the case may be.
And what I have been
saying over the years,
and what I really,
really, really say now
is that when a man or a
woman get out of prison,
they should go through a filter.
And the filter should be
like a hospital setting,
where therapy is there.
Everything is there to
heal so they get educated.
And you come into a-- You're
going to go home in six months.
But before you go home, we're
going to give you some tools.
First this, this, this, these
things you have going here.
And you've got to
read so many books.
It's self-help.
In other words, they
can't hit the bricks
until they start working
on that stuff that's there.
And they need to be
taught and educated.
You've got anger running.
You've got fear.
We've got things
running here that has
to be dealt with if we're
going to heal the human being
and heal society.
You can get them a job.
I was telling Doug that.
I says, you can
take and put a pig
in a beautiful pair of
shoes, and everything--
>>REGINA: Lipstick
on a pig, yeah.
>>JOHNSON: It's still a pig.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>JOHNSON: And so I had
my awakening experience,
and nice clothes, and
everything, and I got married.
But still, I was wounded.
Still, I was traumatized.
Still, I needed someone to sit
down across from me and say,
Kenny, the reason you're
still angry at your wife
is because these are certain
things you haven't looked at.
And I really believe that
most men and women, when
they get out, they should
go see a professional,
or have a professional at their
disposal just so there are no--
>>REGINA: Are there
funds for that?
I mean--
>>JOHNSON: This is what it--
This is what you're like, well,
look at-- I would talk to Doug.
I said, look what the
poli-- there's funds.
Of course, there's funds.
Does society want
to support that?
Does the politicians want to?
No.
>>REGINA: Nope.
No, prisons are big business.
>>JOHNSON: Bernie Sanders,
he's getting millions
and millions and millions.
And they're chasing
Bernie Sanders.
If Bernie Sanders becomes
president next week,
next month, whenever,
and Bernie Sanders
is going to be like George
Bush, Obama, and anybody else.
Then till at the
end, then he could
start pushing his little
programs, whatever
they is-- if.
But there's no
millions and millions
and millions of dollars
to hear Bobo the convict,
or Mary the prostitute.
There's no funds for that.
Let me just limited funds,
but there's not a major--
A guy in San Francisco
says, I would
like to have a hospital
set up for men and women
to come out of jail and
go here and get healed.
He's that smart.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
>>JOHNSON: It makes total sense.
Ronald Reagan got rid of the--
>>REGINA: Yes, a lot of funding
for mental health facilities.
>>JOHNSON: In mental illness,
those guys, men and women,
land up in prison.
I would go to prison, and I
would watch my back sometimes.
Because I'm saying,
that guy is a nut,
and I'd better watch him.
>>REGINA: That's what I
was asking you earlier.
There's a lot of that in prison.
>>JOHNSON: And I have had nuts
come up to me and swing on me
and start fighting,
swinging at me.
I had to beat them off me,
because they'd have flipped.
>>REGINA: Right.
They're mentally ill.
>>JOHNSON: They're mentally ill.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>JOHNSON: And you're releasing
those people in society.
I mean, here's convicts
afraid of other convicts.
And you let that guy out
as a-- and so I'm afraid,
and he's angry.
And you let us out
back in society.
So what are we going to do?
We're going to
beat our women up.
We're going to slap our kids.
We're going to do
whatever we can
out of rage, because that
has not been dealt with,
that trauma.
>>REGINA: You saw the
work that Doug Noll
is doing-- we only have a
couple minutes left-- as well.
And that has to do with
this thing that, in a sense,
Gangaji did for you.
>>JOHNSON: Yes, yes, yes.
>>REGINA: She was doing deep
seeing, but also listening.
And as Doug Noll's
project, a Prison of Peace,
they're doing this
deep listening.
Do you see some real
hope that something
that really as simple as
having someone feel heard
is going to make a
difference in that world?
>>JOHNSON: When people
come into prison,
inmates are so happy to
see them, to get a visit.
So whatever you bring is fine.
And when you bring,
it they receive it.
And so I have hope for those
guys, the men and women who
are anxious to receive the
teachings and the truth
and the medicine that myself,
Doug, and other people
bring in.
But then they have to come
out and keep doing the work.
It doesn't stop.
I mean, it doesn't stop.
This society needs
health care professionals
dealing with a
part of our society
that's over a million people
that are actually wounded.
We know they're wounded.
Why do we know?
Look what the crimes
that they're committing.
Look what they're doing.
They're hurting.
They're screaming out,
help me, help me, help me.
>>REGINA: OK, so this
is out of pop culture,
but the movie "Straight Outta
Compton," I went to see that.
I think it probably should be
up for some Academy Awards.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, probably.
>>REGINA: Well done.
But as a white woman watching
it, middle class, I think,
is it that bad that
these guys are just
three or four guys that are
together on a Friday night.
They're just hanging out,
talking on the street,
and some police come up and
just start slamming them
into the hoods of cars?
That's their reality?
>>JOHNSON: That's all the time.
>>REGINA: I was angry.
I was just getting more
upset and angry watching
the movie, thinking, how can
you treat people like that?
>>JOHNSON: Regina,
this happens every day.
That's my reality.
As an African American
man, I drive-- even
in Sonoma, California.
>>REGINA: Yeah, very
liberal, beautiful.
>>JOHNSON: There's
nothing happening.
>>REGINA: No, nothing
happening there.
A lot of good cheese and wine.
>>JOHNSON: Yeah, grapes
are growing there.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>JOHNSON: Grapes are
popping up all around.
But there's four or five
policemen at Starbucks.
And I go get my
coffee, and I'm like,
I brace myself just
walking by, There's
no need for me to brace myself,
but I'm an African American,
there's police.
And it's my nervous system
that-- while I'm driving,
it's just there.
>>REGINA: Well, no, it
didn't happen for no reason.
I mean, there's a long history.
Yeah.
But even like it was portrayed
with the young rappers that
were coming up,
they started rapping
because they couldn't
take the pain of living
like that anymore.
>>JOHNSON: That's right.
And that's how they
dealt with their trauma,
through the singing,
through the music.
>>REGINA: Boy, when it came to
the famous scene in the movie
at the concert in Detroit,
the famous police scene,
almost everyone in
the theater was white
when I went to see the film that
night, and they were all yay.
And they were
totally empathizing.
No one wants to see someone
else hurt and humiliated
in that way.
>>JOHNSON: The human
being by itself
is a compassionate person.
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>JOHNSON: Just a
compassionate, loving person.
That's by itself.
It's all the other
things around society
that turns them against.
You'll see young
men come into prison
that are innocent and sweet,
and they have to choose a group.
Well, a young guy, 17,
18, years old, sweet.
You come from Iran,
you choose a group.
He has to go to
Aryan Brotherhood.
And so when he goes
to Aryan Brotherhood,
he's taking on a
racist philosophy.
And then a young
kid becomes a racist
and starts murdering and killing
just because he has to survive.
>>REGINA: That's right.
Yeah.
Well, OK, well,
we're out of time.
And on that note, we're going
to have another conversation
with a couple other people
and look at the subject
from a number of points of view.
And just any final
thought on what you think
the hope of this situation is?
>>JOHNSON: I believe that
there's hope because of me,
just because of me.
I'm my own hope factory.
Because if I can heal, then
there's hope for everybody.
>>REGINA: Kenny's website
is thissacredspace.org.
He has lovingly shared his
wisdom with those behind bars
for many years now and
is supported by donations
from those who care
about those who may have
stopped caring for themselves.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]